Adds Internal mechanisms and retriever for MMR based result diversification (#135880)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/elasticsearch/rest-apis/retrievers/diversify-retriever.md

---
applies_to:

>   stack: all

Reviewer: Shouldn't we specify 9.3 here?

>   serverless: ga

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  stack: ga 9.3
  serverless: ga
```

needs a lifecycle and a version number

is this retriever straight to GA? 

if not `s/ga/preview` here

---

# Diversify retriever [diversify-retriever]

The `diversify` retriever is able to reduce the results from another retriever, applying a diversification strategy to the top-N results.
This is particularly useful in cases where you need to have relevant, but
non-similar results returned from your query.

> Some examples of where this could be useful are in eCommerce applications where you want to show the end user a better variety of results, or in a RAG workflow to provide more diverse context in your LLM prompt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Practical use cases include:
- **eCommerce applications**: Show users a wider variety of products rather than multiple similar items
- **Retrieval augmented generation (RAG) workflows**: Provide more diverse context to the LLM, reducing redundancy in the prompt
```

the `field` parameter and in reference to the provided `query_vector`.
Note that the order of the results returned from the inner retriever is not changed.
This is based on the paper "[The Use of MMR, Diversity-Based Reranking for Reordering Documents and Producing Summaries](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~jgc/publication/The_Use_MMR_Diversity_Based_LTMIR_1998.pdf)" from Jaime Carbonell and Jade Goldstein at CMU.

## Parameters [diversify-retriever-parameters]

`type`
:   (Required, string)

    The type of diversification to use. Currently only `mmr` (maximum marginal relevance) is supported.

`field`
:   (Required, string)

    The name of the field that will use its values for the diversification process.
    The field must be a `dense_vector` type.

`num_candidates`
:   (Required, integer)

    The maximum number of top-N results to return.

`retriever`
:   (Required, retriever object)

    A single child retriever to specify which sets of returned top documents will have the diversification applied to them.
    Note that although some of the inner retriever's results may be removed, the rank and order will not change.

> `query_vector`

Author: Good call - I'll add a follow up to this one

> `query_vector`

Author: FYI - there's a task on the backlog for adding `query_vector_builder` support

:   (Optional, array of `float` or `byte`)

    Query vector. Must have the same number of dimensions as the vector field you are searching against.
    Must be either an array of floats or a hex-encoded byte vector.

`lambda`
:   (Required if `mmr` is used, float)

>     A number between 0.0 and 1.0 specifying how much weight for diversification should be given to the query vector as opposed to the amount of weight given to the field values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    A value between 0.0 and 1.0 that controls how similarity is calculated during diversification. Higher values weight comparisons between field values more heavily, lower values weight the query vector more heavily.
```

this sentence was a little hard to read, tried to clarify by inferring from example
Trying to clarify this, but I might have it all wrong. Keep me honest here 😄

## Example

The following example uses a MMR diversification retriever to diversify and
return the top three results from the inner standard retriever.
The lambda is set at 0.7 which favors the weight from the comparisons of the
vectors in `my_dense_field_vector` over the query vector for determining the

> differencs between the documents.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example uses a `diversify` retriever of type `mmr` to diversify and
return the top three results from the inner standard retriever.
The `lambda` value of 0.7 weights `my_dense_field_vector` comparisons more heavily than query vector similarity when determining document differences.
```

:::{note}
The ordering of results returned from the inner retriever is preserved.
:::

## Parameters [diversify-retriever-parameters]

`type`
:   (Required, string)

    The type of diversification to use. Currently only `mmr` (maximum marginal relevance) is supported.

`field`
:   (Required, string)

    The name of the field that will use its values for the diversification process.
    The field must be a `dense_vector` type.

`rank_window_size`
:   (Required, integer)

    The maximum number of top-documents the `diversify` retriever will receive from the inner retriever.

`retriever`
:   (Required, retriever object)

    A single child retriever that provides the initial result set for diversification.
    :::{note}
    Although some of the inner retriever's results may be removed, the rank and order of the remaining documents is preserved.
    :::

`query_vector`
:   (Optional, array of `float` or `byte`)

    Query vector. Must have the same number of dimensions as the vector field you are searching against.
    Must be either an array of floats or a hex-encoded byte vector.

`lambda`

> :   (Required if `mmr` is used, float)

Reviewer 3: It looks like we accept a default value here? 

If we want to flag this as required, Nitpick, should be " (Required for`mmr`, float)"

    A value between 0.0 and 1.0 that controls how similarity is calculated during diversification. Higher values weight comparisons between field values more heavily, lower values weight the query vector more heavily.

`size`
:   (Optional, only if `mmr` is used, integer)

    The maximum number of top-N results to return.

## Example

The following example uses a `diversify` retriever of type `mmr` to diversify and
return the top three results from the inner standard retriever.
The `lambda` value of 0.7 weights `my_dense_field_vector` comparisons more heavily than query vector similarity when determining document differences.

```console

> GET my_index/_search

Reviewer 3: Can we add size to this example, and make sure to differentiate size vs rank window size in the param docs?
